# Chemical Formulae and Chemical Equations

## 1.21 Write Word Equations and Balanced Chemical Equations to Represent the Reactions Studied in This Specification

A chemical equation which is expressed by using words is called a word equation.

Example: Carbon + oxygen → carbon dioxide

A chemical equation which is expressed by using symbols is called a chemical equation.

Example: C(s) + O2 (g) → CO2(g)

## 1.22 Use the State Symbols (s), (l), (g) and (aq) in Chemical Equations to Represent Solids, Liquids, Gases and Aqueous Solutions Respectively

| Symbols | Meaning          |
| ------- | ---------------- |
| (s)     | Solids           |
| (l)     | Liquids          |
| (g)     | Gases            |
| (aq)    | Aqueous solution |

## 1.23 Understand How the Formulae of Simple Compounds Can Be Obtained Experimentally, Including Metal Oxides, Water and Salts Containing Water of Crystallisation

Finding the n in BaCl2.nH2O

Mass of crucible=30.00g\
Mass of crucible +barium chloride crystals, BaCl2.nH2O =32.44g\
Mass of crucible +anhydrous barium chloride, BaCl2 =32.08g\
Mass of BaCl2 =32.08-30.00=2.08g\
Mass of water =32.44 - 32.08 = 0.36g

| BaCl2                      | H2O                  |
| -------------------------- | -------------------- |
| Combining masses (g)       | Combining masses (g) |
| 2.08                       | 0.36                 |
| Number of moles            | Number of moles      |
| 2.08/208                   | 0.36/18              |
| =                          | =                    |
| 0.01                       | 0.02                 |
| Ratio of moles             |                      |
| 1:2                        |                      |
| Simple (empirical) formula |                      |
| BaCl2.2H2O                 |                      |

## 1.24 Calculate Empirical and Molecular Formulae from Experimental Data

| C                          | H                        |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------ |
| Combining masses (g)       | Combining masses (g)     |
| 85.7                       | 14.3                     |
| Number of moles in atoms   | Number of moles in atoms |
| 85.7/12                    | 14.3/1                   |
| =                          | =                        |
| 7.14                       | 14.3                     |
| Ratio of moles             |                          |
| 1                          |                          |
| Simple (empirical) formula |                          |
| C                          |                          |

Converting empirical formulae into molecular formulae

Relative formula mass of the compound was 56.

56/14 = 4\
So you need four lots of CH2\
The molecular formula is C4H8.

## 1.25 Calculate Reacting Masses Using Experimental Data and Chemical Equations

Calculate the mass of magnesium oxide that can be made by completely burning 6g of magnesium in oxygen.

Equation for reaction: 2Mg + O₂ → 2MgO

1. Calculate the amount, in moles, of magnesium reacted\
Ar of Mg is 24

Amount of magnesium = (6÷24) = 0.25 mol

2. Calculate the amount of magnesium oxide formed\
The equation tells us that 2 mol of Mg for 2 mol of MgO, hence the amount of MgO formed is the same as the amount of Mg reacted.

Amount of MgO formed is 0.25 mol

3. Calculate the mass of MgO formed\
Mr of MgO + (24 + 16) = 40

Mass of magnesium oxide = (0.25 x 40) = 10g

## 1.26 Calculate Percentage Yield

The actual yield is the amount of product that's actually there to be used at the end of the manufacturing process.

The predicted yield is the amount that might have been expected if nothing had got lost along the way.

In practice, some product will be lost during the process when purifying the product by filtration or evaporation or when transferring a liquid or when heating.

The percentage yield is a way of comparing the actual yield with the predicted yield. It's calculated using a formula:

$$\text{Percentage yield} = \frac{\text{actual yield} \times 100\%}{\text{predicted yield}}$$

## 1.27 Carry Out Mole Calculations Using Volumes and Molar Concentrations

$$\text{Mole} = \frac{\text{Volume(cm}^3)}{1000} \times \text{Concentration(mol/dm}^3)$$

$$\text{Concentration in g/dm}^3 = \text{Concentration in mol/dm}^3 \times \text{Mr}$$