> **h) Metallic crystals**
>
> **1.46 understand that a metal can be described as a giant structure
> of positive ions surrounded by a sea of delocalised electrons**\
> Metal atoms are held strongly to each other by metallic bonding. In
> the metal lattice, the atoms lose their valence electrons and become
> positively charged. The valence electrons no longer belong to any
> metal atom and are said to be delocalised. They move freely between
> the metal ions like sea of electrons. Hence, this lattice structure is
> described as a lattice of positive ions surrounded by a "sea of mobile
> electrons". We can therefore define a metallic bond as the force of
> attraction between positive metal ions and sea of delocalised
> electrons.
>
> **1.47 explain the electrical conductivity and malleability of a metal
> in terms of its structure and bonding. Electrical conductivity**:
> Metals are good at conductors because of the free electron diffusion.
> When a metal is used in an electrical circuit, electrons entering one
> end of the metal cause another similar electron to displace from the
> other end. That's why they are very good conductors.
>
> **Malleability and ductility:**In metallic bonding, the valence
> electrons do not belong to any particular metal atom. If sufficient
> force is applied to the metal, one layer of atom can slide over
> another without disrupting the metallic bonding.
>
> As a result metallic bonds are strong but flexible. Therefore, they
> can be hammered into different shapes without breaking.
